abci++ spec: reorganizing basic concepts, adding outline for easy navigation (#8048)
tendermint/tendermint: spec/abci++/abci++_basic_concepts_002_draft.md

---
order: 1
title: Overview and basic concepts
---

## Outline

> - [ABCI vs. ABCI](#abci-vs-abci)

Author: yes, thanks

ABCI++ overcomes these limitations by allowing the application to intervene at three key places of the block execution. The new interface allows block proposers to perform application-dependent work in a block through the `PrepareProposal` method; validators to perform application-dependent work in a proposed block through the `ProcessProposal` method; and applications to require their validators do more than just validate blocks, e.g., validator guaranteed IBC connection attempts, through the `ExtendVote` and `VerifyVoteExtension` methods. Furthermore, ABCI++ renames {`BeginBlock`, [`DeliverTx`], `EndBlock`} to `FinalizeBlock`, as a simplified way to deliver a decided block to the Application.

## Methods overview
[&uparrow; Back to Outline](#outline)

> Methods can be classified into four categories: consensus, mempool, info, and state-sync. When Tendermint and the Application run in separate processes, Tendermint opens a different connection for each category to enhance parallelism.

Author: 👍 I agree is an implementation detail.  I'll remove it

### Consensus/block execution methods

The first time a new blockchain is started, Tendermint calls
`InitChain`. From then on, method `FinalizeBlock` is executed at the end of each
block, resulting in an updated Application state.
During consensus execution of a block height, before method `FinalizeBlock` is
called, methods `PrepareProposal`, `ProcessProposal`, `ExtendVote`, and
`VerifyVoteExtension` may be called several times.
See [Tendermint's expected behavior](abci++_tmint_expected_behavior_002_draft.md)
for details on the possible call sequences of these methods.

* [**InitChain:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#initchain) This method initializes the blockchain. Tendermint calls it once upon genesis.

> * [**PrepareProposal:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#prepareproposal) It allows the block proposer to perform application-dependent work in a block before using it as its proposal. This enables, for instance, batch optimizations to a block, which has been empirically demonstrated to be a key component for scaling. Method `PrepareProposal` is called every time Tendermint is about to send

Author: That's my understanding. PrepareProposal is called once per round and each round potentially has a different proposer.

> * [**PrepareProposal:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#prepareproposal) It allows the block proposer to perform application-dependent work in a block before using it as its proposal. This enables, for instance, batch optimizations to a block, which has been empirically demonstrated to be a key component for scaling. Method `PrepareProposal` is called every time Tendermint is about to send

Reviewer: That's my understanding as well. Unfortunately, the grammar (as it is today) can't capture the rules for "who's the next proposer".

a proposal message, but no previous proposal has been locked at Tendermint level.
Tendermint gathers outstanding transactions from the mempool, generates a block header, and uses
them to create a block to propose. Then, it calls `RequestPrepareProposal`

> with the newly created proposal, called _raw block_. The Application can

Reviewer: raw proposal?
I think we always call it raw proposal elsewhere in the text

Author: I see both used. Maybe I introduced the discrepancy. I'll do a pass and make sure we always use raw proposal.

make changes to the raw proposal, such as modifying transactions, and returns
the (potentially) modified proposal, called _prepared proposal_ in the
`Response*` call. The logic modifying the raw block can be non-deterministic.

* [**ProcessProposal:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#processproposal) It allows a validator to perform application-dependent work in a proposed block. This enables features such as allowing validators to reject a block according to whether the state machine deems it valid, and changing the block execution pipeline. Tendermint calls it when it receives a proposal. The Application cannot
modify the proposal at this point but can reject it if it realizes it is invalid.
If that is the case, Tendermint will prevote `nil` on the proposal, which has
strong liveness implications for Tendermint. As a general rule, the Application
SHOULD accept a prepared proposal passed via `ProcessProposal`, even if a part of
the proposal is invalid (e.g., an invalid transaction); the Application can later
ignore the invalid part of the prepared proposal at block execution time.

> * [**ExtendVote:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#extendvote) It allows applications to force their validators to do more than just validate within consensus. `ExtendVote` allows applications to include non-deterministic data, opaque to Tendermint, to precommit messages (the final round of voting). The data, called _vote extension_, will be part of the proposed block in the next height, along with the vote it is extending.

Author: I see. I have merged your changes to this text from #8031, so it should be fine now :)

The vote extension data is split into two parts, one signed by Tendermint as part
of the vote data structure, and the other (optionally) signed by the Application.
The Application may also choose not to include any vote extension.
Tendermint calls it when is about to send a non-`nil` precommit message. 

* [**VerifyVoteExtension:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#verifyvoteextension) It allows validators to validate the vote extension data attached to a precommit message. If the validation fails, the precommit message will be deemed invalid and ignored
by Tendermint. This has a negative impact on Tendermint's liveness, i.e., if repeatedly vote extensions by correct validators cannot be verified by correct validators, Tendermint may not be able to finalize a block even if sufficiently many (+2/3) of the validators send precommit votes for that block. Thus, `VerifyVoteExtension` should be used with special care.
As a general rule, an Application that detects an invalid vote extension SHOULD
accept it in `ResponseVerifyVoteExtension` and ignore it in its own logic. Tendermint calls it when 

> a process receives a precommit message with a (possibly empty) vote extension.

Author: Shall I open an issue about this?

> a process receives a precommit message with a (possibly empty) vote extension.

Reviewer 2: It seems like it's worth addressing. If there _is_ a use case for which we need to accept the risk to liveness, I guess we should at least document it.

> a process receives a precommit message with a (possibly empty) vote extension.

Reviewer: This is indeed a core point of ABCI++. Extensive discussions on this happened in December. I wrote the minutes of those discussions [here](https://github.com/tendermint/spec/pull/366#issuecomment-988669447) and [here](https://github.com/tendermint/spec/pull/366#issuecomment-991007915)... and maybe some other place I've just missed.
The second link above is the final meeting where we collectively decided to take the approach described in this text. You can check the slides, and we also recorded the meeting (link to recording is there). I remember it was a very interesting (and heated :-D) discussion we had.
Unless there are new concerns about this approach, I'd like us to stand by the decision we took back then.

> a process receives a precommit message with a (possibly empty) vote extension.

Reviewer: In case you don't want to go through the whole discussion again...
IIRC, the main reason that motivated our decision to have Tendermint reject the precommit message if `VerifyVoteExtension` returns _reject_ was that there are compelling use cases (threshold encryption of TXs) that needed to reject those messages in order to work, even if that might have an impact in Tendermint's liveness.
Dev should have more details on those use cases.

> a process receives a precommit message with a (possibly empty) vote extension.

Reviewer 2: It sounds like this has already been covered. I don't think it's a great compromise, but if that's what was agreed I don't have any new data to add.

* [**FinalizeBlock:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#finalizeblock) It delivers a decided block to the Application. The Application must execute the transactions in the block in order and update its state accordingly. Cryptographic commitments to the block and transaction results, via the corresponding
parameters in `ResponseFinalizeBlock`, are included in the header of the next block. Tendermint calls it when a new block is decided.

### Mempool methods

For validating new transactions before they are included in the mempool.

> * [**CheckTx:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#checktx) This method allows the Application to validate transactions against its current state, e.g., checking signatures and account balances. If a transaction passes the validation, then tendermint adds it to its local mempool, discarding it otherwise. Tendermint calls it when it receives a new transaction either coming from an external user or another node.

Reviewer: Yes, that's my understanding

### Info methods

For initialization and queries from the user.

* [**Info:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#info) Used to sync Tendermint with the Application during a handshake that happens on startup.

* [**Query:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#query) Clients can use this method to query the Application for information about the application state.

### State-sync methods

State sync allows new nodes to rapidly bootstrap by discovering, fetching, and applying

> state machine snapshots instead of replaying historical blocks. For more details, see the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
state machine snapshots instead of replaying historical blocks leading to the applied snapshot. For more details, see the
```

[state sync section](../p2p/messages/state-sync.md).

New nodes will discover and request snapshots from other nodes in the P2P network.
A Tendermint node that receives a request for snapshots from a peer will call
`ListSnapshots` on its Application to retrieve any local state snapshots. After receiving

>  snapshots from peers, the new node will offer each snapshot received from a peer

Reviewer: Are they snapshots or snapshot IDs/hashes?

Author: I would say none of the two but closer to snapshot IDs/hashes. As far as I understand, each entry of the returned list contains metadata about a snapshot: the height at which the snapshot was taken, some application-specific formatting data, the number of chunks, ...). Can someone confirm this? I can then fix the text :)

Reviewer: I see. I would suggested to state it's snapshot metadata, and not the whole snapshot. My fear is that text implies the whole snapshot(s) is/are "offered" at this point

Author: I pushed a commit addressing this issue. I have a couple of questions:
- Assume a node receives a list of snapshots. What is the order in which these are offered to the application? Is this application-specific (if so what enables it), or there is some hard-coded order in Tendermint, e.g., height-decreasing order.
- Regarding safety, are snapshots signed by f+1 nodes or something like that? if this delegated to the application?

Author: > Regarding your second question, `OfferSnapshotRequest` contains field `app_hash` which is supposed to be the Merkle tree root of the state the snapshot represents. So the node can check it on the blockchain on one side (as a light client), and then, once it has reconstructed the state, it can re-calculate the hash to make sure the state is good.
> Someone else more familiar with state-sync may want to keep me honest here.

I think there is something I am missing here. If I understand your explanation, what that mechanism guarantees is that a node reaches the snapshot that was offered after applying all its chunks. What I do not understand is how a node knows that a given snapshot is legit. I am sure I am missing something fundamental. Maybe we can take this conversation out of the PR :)

My question I guess is

As the new node receives "chunks" it will apply them sequentially to the local
application with `ApplySnapshotChunk`. When all chunks have been applied, the
Application's `AppHash` is retrieved via an `Info` query. The `AppHash` is then
compared to the blockchain's `AppHash` which is verified via
[light client verification](../light-client/verification/README.md).

In summary:

* [**ListSnapshots:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#listsnapshots) Used by nodes to discover available snapshots on peers.

* [**LoadSnapshotChunk:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#loadsnapshotchunk) Used by nodes to retrieve snapshot chunks from peers.

* [**OfferSnapshot:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#offersnapshot) When a node receives a snapshot from a peer, Tendermint uses this method to offer the snapshot to the Application.

* [**ApplySnapshotChunk:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#applysnapshotchunk) Used by Tendermint to hand snapshot chunks to the Application.

### Other methods

Additionally, there is a [**Flush**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#flush) method that is called on every connection,
and an [**Echo**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#echo) method that is just for debugging.

> >**TODO** Figure out what to do with this.

Reviewer: Hmmm. I don't remember that this TODO refers to... do you? If not, please remove

More details on managing state across connections can be found in the section on
[ABCI Applications](../abci/apps.md).

## Next-block execution vs. same-block execution
[&uparrow; Back to Outline](#outline)

> With ABCI++ predecessor, ABCI, the only moment when the Application had access to a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the original ABCI protocol, the only moment when the Application had access to a
```

> block was when it was decided. This led to a block execution model, called _next-block

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
block was after it was decided. This led to a block execution model, called _next-block
```

execution_, where some fields hashed in a block header refer to the execution of the
previous block, namely:

> * the merkle root of the Application's state

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* the Merkle root of the Application's state
```

* the transaction results
* the consensus parameter updates
* the validator updates

> With ABCI++, an Application may decide to keep using the next-block execution model;

Reviewer 2: Perhaps:
```suggestion
With ABCI++, an Application may decide to keep using the next-block execution model, by doing all its processing in `FinalizeBlock`;
```

however the new methods introduced, `PrepareProposal` and `ProcessProposal` allow
for a new execution model, called _same-block execution_. An Application implementing
this execution model, upon receiving a raw proposal via `RequestPrepareProposal`
and potentially modifying its transaction list,
fully executes the resulting prepared proposal as though it was the decided block.
The results of the block execution are used as follows:

> * the Application keeps the events generated and provides them if `FinalizeBlock`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* the Application keeps the events generated and provides them in `FinalizeBlock`
```

I'm not sure what "provides" means here. The application is looking up its saved values from earlier execution, I think?

Reviewer 3: I think this is saying that the application must store the events generated during `PrepareProposal` and finally returns them back to Tendermint during the `FinalizeBlock` call if the block is decided. i.e. there's no way to return events from `PrepareProposal`

  is finally called on this prepared proposal.
* the merkle root resulting from executing the prepared proposal is provided in
  `ResponsePrepareProposal` and thus refers to the **current block**. Tendermint
  will use it in the prepared proposal's header.
* likewise, the transaction results from executing the prepared proposal are
  provided in `ResponsePrepareProposal` and refer to the transactions in the
  **current block**. Tendermint will use them to calculate the results hash
  in the prepared proposal's header.
* the consensus parameter updates and validator updates are also provided in
  `ResponsePrepareProposal` and reflect the result of the prepared proposal's
  execution. They come into force in height H+1 (as opposed to the H+2 rule
  in next-block execution model).

If the Application decides to keep the next-block execution model, it will not
provide any data in `ResponsePrepareProposal`, other than an optionally modified
transaction list.

In the long term, the execution model will be set in a new boolean parameter
*same_block* in `ConsensusParams`.

> It should **not** be changed once the blockchain has started unless the Application

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
It **must not** be changed once the blockchain has started unless the Application
```

I feel like we can safely be prescriptive about this. The problem with saying "if you really know what you're doing" is people usually assume they do. I'd suggest we default to saying "don't do this" without qualification, unless we also want to explain somewhere what the criteria are for knowing when it's OK.

preserve blockchain compatibility. Therefore we need an interim solution until
soft upgrades are specified and implemented in Tendermint. This somewhat _unsafe_
solution consists in Tendermint assuming same-block execution if the Application
fills the above mentioned fields in `ResponsePrepareProposal`.

### Tendermint timeouts in same-block execution

The new same-block execution mode requires the Application to fully execute the
prepared block at `PrepareProposal` time. This execution is synchronous, so
Tendermint cannot make progress until the Application returns from `PrepareProposal`.
This stands on Tendermint's critical path: if the Application takes a long time
executing the block, the default value of _TimeoutPropose_ might not be sufficient
to accommodate the long block execution time and non-proposer processes might time
out and prevote `nil`, thus starting a further round unnecessarily.

The Application is the best suited to provide a value for _TimeoutPropose_ so
that the block execution time upon `PrepareProposal` fits well in the propose
timeout interval.

Currently, the Application can override the value of _TimeoutPropose_ via the

> `config.toml` file. In the future, `ConsensusParams` may have an extra field

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`config.toml` file. In the future, `ConsensusParams` will have an extra field
```

I think we agreed we're doing this?

Reviewer 3: Yup.

with the current _TimeoutPropose_ value so that the Application can adapt it at every height.

## Determinism
[&uparrow; Back to Outline](#outline)

ABCI++ applications must implement deterministic finite-state machines to be
securely replicated by the Tendermint consensus engine. This means block execution
over the Consensus Connection must be strictly deterministic: given the same

> ordered set of requests, all nodes will compute identical responses, for all

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ordered set of transactions, all nodes will compute identical responses, for all
```

successive `FinalizeBlock` calls. This is critical because the
responses are included in the header of the next block, either via a Merkle root
or directly, so all nodes must agree on exactly what they are.

> For this reason, it is recommended that applications not be exposed to any

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For this reason, it is recommended that application state not be exposed to any
```

external user or process except via the ABCI connections to a consensus engine
like Tendermint Core. The Application must only change its state based on input
from block execution (`FinalizeBlock` calls), and not through
any other kind of request. This is the only way to ensure all nodes see the same
transactions and compute the same results.

Some Applications may choose to execute the blocks that are about to be proposed
(via `PrepareProposal`), or those that the Application is asked to validate
(via `Processproposal`). However, the state changes caused by processing those
proposed blocks must never replace the previous state until `FinalizeBlock` confirms
the block decided.

Additionally, vote extensions or the validation thereof (via `ExtendVote` or
`VerifyVoteExtension`) must _never_ have side effects on the current state.

> They can only be used when their data is included in a block.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
They can only be used when their data is provided in a `RequestPrepareProposal` call.
```

If there is some non-determinism in the state machine, consensus will eventually
fail as nodes disagree over the correct values for the block header. The

> non-determinism must be fixed and the nodes restarted.

Reviewer 2: Is it worth noting somewhere that one practical example of this is that a well-meaning application may wind up equivocating on future blocks, and thus appear Byzantine even though the fault was not explicitly malicious?

(This doesn't add any new information, but the example might help clarify why this matters)

for details on the possible call sequences of these methods.

* [**InitChain:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#initchain) This method initializes the blockchain. Tendermint calls it once upon genesis.

* [**PrepareProposal:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#prepareproposal) It allows the block proposer to perform application-dependent work in a block before using it as its proposal. This enables, for instance, batch optimizations to a block, which has been empirically demonstrated to be a key component for scaling. Method `PrepareProposal` is called every time Tendermint is about to send
a proposal message, but no previous proposal has been locked at Tendermint level.
Tendermint gathers outstanding transactions from the mempool, generates a block header, and uses
them to create a block to propose. Then, it calls `RequestPrepareProposal`
with the newly created proposal, called _raw block_. The Application can
make changes to the raw proposal, such as modifying transactions, and returns
the (potentially) modified proposal, called _prepared proposal_ in the
`Response*` call. The logic modifying the raw block can be non-deterministic.

> * [**ProcessProposal:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#processproposal) It allows a validator to perform application-dependent work in a proposed block. This enables features such as allowing validators to reject a block according to whether the state machine deems it valid, and changing the block execution pipeline. Tendermint calls it when it receives a proposal. The Application cannot

Author: I have a question here. What happens if a node is locked on a block b at a round r and receives a proposal at a height > h. According to the protocol, the node will accept the proposal and send prevote. What is unclear to me is whether it has to call ProcessProposal or not: the node should have already called ProcessProposal(b) in r.

modify the proposal at this point but can reject it if it realizes it is invalid.
If that is the case, Tendermint will prevote `nil` on the proposal, which has
strong liveness implications for Tendermint. As a general rule, the Application
SHOULD accept a prepared proposal passed via `ProcessProposal`, even if a part of
the proposal is invalid (e.g., an invalid transaction); the Application can
ignore the invalid part of the prepared proposal at block execution time.

* [**ExtendVote:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#extendvote) It allows applications to force their validators to do more than just validate within consensus. `ExtendVote` allows applications to include non-deterministic data, opaque to Tendermint, to precommit messages (the final round of voting). 
The data, called _vote extension_, will also be made available to the
application in the next height, along with the vote it is extending, in the rounds
where the local process is the proposer.
The vote extension data is split into two parts, one signed by Tendermint as part
of the vote data structure, and the other (optionally) signed by the Application.
The Application may also choose not to include any vote extension.

> Tendermint calls it when is about to send a non-`nil` precommit message. 

Author: I have removed that text, which was not up-to-date with the latest decisions (#7664). I think it is not worthy to discuss those details on this page, which is supposed to only give an overview of the methods. Page abci++_methods_002_draft.md describes what was agreed in #7664.

### State-sync methods

State sync allows new nodes to rapidly bootstrap by discovering, fetching, and applying
state machine snapshots instead of replaying historical blocks. For more details, see the
[state sync section](../p2p/messages/state-sync.md).

New nodes will discover and request snapshots from other nodes in the P2P network.
A Tendermint node that receives a request for snapshots from a peer will call
`ListSnapshots` on its Application to retrieve any local state snapshots. After receiving
 snapshots from peers, the new node will offer each snapshot received from a peer
to its local Application via the `OfferSnapshot` method.

Snapshots may be quite large and are thus broken into smaller "chunks" that can be
assembled into the whole snapshot. Once the Application accepts a snapshot and
begins restoring it, Tendermint will fetch snapshot "chunks" from existing nodes.
The node providing "chunks" will fetch them from its local Application using
the `LoadSnapshotChunk` method.

As the new node receives "chunks" it will apply them sequentially to the local
application with `ApplySnapshotChunk`. When all chunks have been applied, the

> Application's `AppHash` is retrieved via an `Info` query. The `AppHash` is then

Reviewer 3: I would clarify that this `AppHash` comparison is being done to ensure that the state sync was performed correctly. Consider adding a line that explains, such as, "To ensure that the sync proceeded correctly, Tendermint compares the local Application's `Apphash` to the `AppHash` stored on chain"

compared to the blockchain's `AppHash` which is verified via
[light client verification](../light-client/verification/README.md).

In summary:

* [**ListSnapshots:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#listsnapshots) Used by nodes to discover available snapshots on peers.

> * [**LoadSnapshotChunk:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#loadsnapshotchunk) Used by nodes to retrieve snapshot chunks from peers.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
* [**LoadSnapshotChunk:**](./abci++_methods_002_draft.md#loadsnapshotchunk) Used by Tendermint to retrieve snapshot chunks from the application to send to peers.
```
